[SPEAKER_00]: hello and welcome to veterans of the valley i'm tom turbyville alfred whitey birdwell was a sherman tank driver in world war ii's european theater
[SPEAKER_00]: after D-Day, but during the final push in the Battle of the Bulge and until victory in Europe.
[SPEAKER_00]: He was overseas just more than a year, but probably covered more miles per day served than just about anyone.
[SPEAKER_00]: He proudly recalls when he drove the first American tank over the Rhine River for the third armored spearheads, a Purple Heart recipient.
[SPEAKER_00]: He drove a tank every day, except for those 10 days that he was laid up because of shrapnel wounds.
[SPEAKER_00]: now 91 years old.
[SPEAKER_00]: His is another fascinating story of World War II service that we are honored to tell.
[SPEAKER_00]: So welcome, Whitey Birdwell, to Veterans of the Valley.
[SPEAKER_00]: Whitey, it is a pleasure to have you.
[SPEAKER_00]: I got to meet you
[SPEAKER_00]: back on May the 1st when we were honored to take the Lone Star Honor Flight trip to Washington.
[SPEAKER_00]: And that was a great trip that we've been able to review here on Veterans of the Valley.
[SPEAKER_00]: But we're here today to talk about your life and your service.
[SPEAKER_00]: You're a Texan.
[SPEAKER_00]: You grew up in Henderson.
[SPEAKER_01]: Absolutely.
[SPEAKER_00]: Absolutely.
[SPEAKER_00]: Sort of take us through, you know, from Henderson.
[SPEAKER_00]: And you worked for a while but couldn't find steady work.
[SPEAKER_00]: So you said the day after you got laid off from a job, you got drafted.
[SPEAKER_00]: Is that right?
[SPEAKER_01]: I...
[SPEAKER_01]: All I had was just neighborhood work up until that time.
[SPEAKER_01]: And when the defense work started, we went down to Beaumont and went to work for Loomis Company where we were making beauty dying for the tires.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: And we built that plant there and we finished it up on the day that I finished my job.
[SPEAKER_01]: on the afternoon then I got my draft card the next morning.
[SPEAKER_01]: So I went into Houston and they swore me in and so I waited six weeks and I went down to Fort Sam Houston and they put me in uniform.
[SPEAKER_00]: Well you were married and had two kids at the time and you were only making about $1.10 an hour at your job.
[SPEAKER_00]: So this was probably better for you to be in the Army.
[SPEAKER_00]: You went into the Army in March of 43.
[SPEAKER_00]: overseas to Europe, January the 1st, 1944.
[SPEAKER_00]: And a fascinating part of your family history is that you had five brothers and they all served in World War II.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: All six of you, right?
[SPEAKER_00]: Served in World War II.
[SPEAKER_00]: And two are, you and one other are still alive today, is that right?
[SPEAKER_01]: Yeah, I got three of us.
[SPEAKER_01]: Three of you are still.
[SPEAKER_01]: My brother just served in North Africa, and the one that was in the Navy, the baby brother.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: Still living.
[SPEAKER_00]: As we said in the opening, you were a tank driver.
[SPEAKER_00]: That's what you were trained to do.
[SPEAKER_00]: You drove lead tank for 1st Platoon, the 3rd Armored Division, and they're called the Spearheads.
[SPEAKER_00]: Talk a little bit about the Spearheads in that unit.
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, our job was to go through the German lines and cut them in two and break their communications, and the other trooper to come behind and clean up.
[SPEAKER_01]: And that's what we did.
[SPEAKER_01]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: So that was the, they told us that when you get started, don't stop.
[SPEAKER_01]: Don't stop for anything because it's just like a wave of water in front of a car.
[SPEAKER_01]: When you stop and it lashes back on you, it's hard to start again.
[SPEAKER_01]: So drive through, just keep driving.
[SPEAKER_00]: Just keep driving.
[SPEAKER_00]: Don't stop or you'll get stuck.
[SPEAKER_01]: When you get them moving, move them.
[SPEAKER_00]: I'm always fascinated by veterans who did serve in the European theater about how they got there.
[SPEAKER_00]: And you went,
[SPEAKER_00]: aboard a converted luxury ship or passenger ship, the Queen Mary.
[SPEAKER_01]: Oh, the Queen Mary, yes.
[SPEAKER_01]: That sure did.
[SPEAKER_01]: Yeah.
[SPEAKER_01]: And it was, I don't know how many troops were on it, but it was from wall to wall.
[SPEAKER_01]: And kind of hard to eat that limey cooking and drink the coffee and tea mixed together.
[SPEAKER_01]: We made it.
[SPEAKER_00]: Somehow you did it.
[SPEAKER_00]: You left from Boston Harbor.
[SPEAKER_00]: And how long did it take you, a week?
[SPEAKER_01]: It took six days.
[SPEAKER_01]: Six days?
[SPEAKER_01]: In England.
[SPEAKER_01]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: And on the seventh day it was in Lahar, France.
[SPEAKER_00]: So you landed in England, you took the train down and actually took an LST across the channel.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yes.
[SPEAKER_00]: And landed in Lahar, France.
[SPEAKER_00]: First you thought you were going to North Africa, is that right?
[SPEAKER_01]: No, they said, well, in training.
[SPEAKER_00]: In training.
[SPEAKER_01]: But they didn't know how the war was moving and so when they found out that
[SPEAKER_01]: North Africa was getting along just fine, and they decided they would send us over to Germany and just hit the heart of the Germans there in Germany and help close the gate on them.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: Talk a little bit more about your mission and the service of your particular mission because you were in Lahare, France, and your job, like you said, was to cut through the German lines and just sort of disrupt things and band them together.
[SPEAKER_00]: Talk a little bit more specifically about that.
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, it's just like plying a field.
[SPEAKER_01]: When you drive through, the Germans go this way.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yes, sir.
[SPEAKER_01]: And then we had the fourth armored on one side of us, one E company on one side of us, and another company on the other side.
[SPEAKER_01]: And we just kind of plowed them in together.
[SPEAKER_01]: And then the rear echelon would come along and pick them up and send them back to the prison camp.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: So they were the ones that were more in charge of taking them as prisoner.
[SPEAKER_00]: You were the one that sort of banded them together and said, march along.
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, the only time that we took prisoners is when they gave up.
[SPEAKER_01]: on the front line.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: And we'd take their guns and their helmets and just send them back down the road.
[SPEAKER_00]: You said at the time that you did encounter resistance.
[SPEAKER_00]: Oh, yeah.
[SPEAKER_00]: But those who wanted to surrender... Gave up.
[SPEAKER_00]: They gave up.
[SPEAKER_00]: They weren't ready.
[SPEAKER_00]: They didn't want war anymore themselves.
[SPEAKER_01]: Home guards.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yeah.
[SPEAKER_01]: There were people who were scripted in the Army as home guards.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: And the roughest one that we faced was the Hitler Youth and the SS.
[SPEAKER_01]: That was a reference.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right, right.
[SPEAKER_00]: Those are the ones that you had to give resistance back to.
[SPEAKER_00]: Back to, yeah.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right, right.
[SPEAKER_00]: Because of, right.
[SPEAKER_00]: Talk about, oh, you talked about your tank and how you would sort of camouflage your tank to keep the Germans from knowing exactly who you all were.
[SPEAKER_00]: You had a little bit of a unique way of doing that.
[SPEAKER_01]: I don't know.
[SPEAKER_01]: We didn't do that so much as some of the other guys did who were in the holding position.
[SPEAKER_01]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: We've been moving.
[SPEAKER_01]: We didn't have time to do that.
[SPEAKER_01]: We just had the regular army color on it.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: But you had a piece of steel.
[SPEAKER_01]: The only time.
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, I had a piece of steel on the front of it.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: That's what I meant.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yeah, that's what I was talking about.
[SPEAKER_01]: When I got into the steel mill in Germany, I saw this piece of soft metal steel there.
[SPEAKER_01]: And it was pretty thick, and I asked the sergeant, I said, can you put that on the front of my tank to cover up that star?
[SPEAKER_01]: Uh-huh.
[SPEAKER_01]: He called the vehicle over there and picked it up and welded it on the front of the tank.
[SPEAKER_01]: My tank run like a mad watch with a tail up in there with that heavy piece of metal on the front.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right, right.
[SPEAKER_01]: It really did the job because it had a lot of gouges in it.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: Now, as a tank...
[SPEAKER_00]: You drove the tank.
[SPEAKER_00]: There were five in each tank, right?
[SPEAKER_01]: Five in each tank.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: And you said that your entire brigade or your unit had about the firepower of 17 tanks, right?
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, yes, because we had five tanks on line, and we had the Air Force observer and the artillery observer in the tank, so we had two extra tanks.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: Had 17 in firepower.
[SPEAKER_01]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: You are a receiver of the Purple Heart.
[SPEAKER_00]: You did earn the Purple Heart, I guess, if that's the word for it.
[SPEAKER_00]: I guess it's not something that people strive for.
[SPEAKER_00]: But talk about the circumstances of how you were wounded because you were trying to help a fellow soldier.
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, they were sent up on a hill to observe.
[SPEAKER_01]: And we got up there, we didn't see anything.
[SPEAKER_01]: Of course, we took our field glasses and looked around.
[SPEAKER_01]: And the sister driver got out to throw hay on the tank to camouflage it.
[SPEAKER_01]: And that's when the mortar fire started coming in and cut his arm off.
[SPEAKER_01]: And so he was just in limbo out there, not knowing, you know, just crazy.
[SPEAKER_01]: When you get hit that way, I don't know how,
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, I don't know how you feel, I don't know how to explain it, except he was just out there in La La Land, suffering.
[SPEAKER_01]: So I jumped out of the tank and kept him in the foxhole there.
[SPEAKER_01]: So the mortar fire kept coming in and would hit on the side, and the ground was shaking, and I thought, well, the next one is gonna be in here on top of it and get both of us, so if I can get out and let them follow me, it would save him.
[SPEAKER_01]: So when I jumped out, I foot slipped on a,
[SPEAKER_01]: Bunch of hay, and I laid there, and that's when the mortar bar hit me.
[SPEAKER_01]: And I tell everybody, I say, well, you know which way I was going when I got shot, because where I got shot, but it just got me started, and I got out of there.
[SPEAKER_00]: 129 pieces of shrapnel they took out of you, right?
[SPEAKER_01]: Put it in a little deal like that, and I lost it somewhere.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yeah.
[SPEAKER_01]: My souvenir.
[SPEAKER_00]: But you were able to get up and go to safety, though, right?
[SPEAKER_01]: It didn't cripple me.
[SPEAKER_01]: They just sent me to the hospital to
[SPEAKER_01]: infection right and to get the satin out that was there right right so they dug it out and popped it out and give me penicillin and i was all right after that and you understand that the fellow that you the soldier that you were trying to help he was sent off to england i guess yeah he was sent off to england and somewhere else but he survived his wound as far as you know but you never heard any more about him at all right
[SPEAKER_00]: Well, he probably remembers the guy that jumped in the foxhole with him.
[SPEAKER_00]: I'm sure if he's alive today, I'm sure he remembers that.
[SPEAKER_01]: They call me Tex, so I remember.
[SPEAKER_00]: After the hospital now, you were sent back to work.
[SPEAKER_00]: You were in the hospital for nine to 10 days.
[SPEAKER_00]: And talk about after you were in the hospital, you wanted to go back to the front lines.
[SPEAKER_01]: I did go back to the front lines.
[SPEAKER_01]: The safest place there was the front lines.
[SPEAKER_00]: Exactly.
[SPEAKER_01]: So I went back and they were in Cologne.
[SPEAKER_01]: And that's where I was wounded on the Cologne Plains, and they were in Cologne waiting for the bridge to be built across the river to jump off again.
[SPEAKER_01]: So I went back and got the old tank and drove the first one across the Rhine River.
[SPEAKER_00]: Talk about that.
[SPEAKER_00]: That's quite significant, I think.
[SPEAKER_00]: It was the first tank to drive.
[SPEAKER_00]: It was over a pontoon bridge, right?
[SPEAKER_00]: Over the Rhine River.
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, those pontoons were huge.
[SPEAKER_01]: My brother-in-law was there.
[SPEAKER_01]: I happened to get a glimpse of him, but I didn't get to talk to him because he was too busy.
[SPEAKER_01]: They just come and put up the wigs and took off.
[SPEAKER_01]: They were huge pontoons, and they tied them off on each side of that river because it was real swift.
[SPEAKER_01]: And then they tied them together with steel with pins in them.
[SPEAKER_01]: Then they laid the track across them where it would work.
[SPEAKER_01]: And when I looked at that thing, I said, well, I don't know.
[SPEAKER_01]: I'm going to leave my hatch off in case I go down.
[SPEAKER_01]: I can get out of this tank.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: But they were good.
[SPEAKER_01]: The Army supplied them real good.
[SPEAKER_01]: And so it would just go down and up, down and up.
[SPEAKER_01]: So we had to take our time going across them and not really rush, but just go with the flow.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: And so we all, trucks and all, made it across real good.
[SPEAKER_00]: It was Whitey Birdwell's unit, as a matter of fact, that
[SPEAKER_00]: As we read, it fired one of the first shells into Germany of the war.
[SPEAKER_00]: And the 110-mile march, now you... We went back for... You went with those people, right?
[SPEAKER_01]: We went back.
[SPEAKER_01]: It was our time to go back for arrest and maintenance on their tanks.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: And we went back a half a day when they told us we had to jump off because the 104th Infantry Division had the Germans to give way and they followed them up.
[SPEAKER_01]: And they said, well, we got 110 miles to go before nightfall to catch them.
[SPEAKER_01]: So we made it up to within about, I guess about 15 miles of the town.
[SPEAKER_01]: And when the Germans shot the third tank driver's head off with a bazooka.
[SPEAKER_01]: And so that kind of disrupted the march.
[SPEAKER_01]: But they just got together and decided, well, we got to have somebody in town to let the Germans know that we arrived.
[SPEAKER_01]: And the diesel tank didn't have any exhaust flash from it.
[SPEAKER_01]: Where the raider tanks did, they burnt 90 octane gas and it was a huge flame coming out of the exhaust light.
[SPEAKER_01]: So then I did the night duty anyway because they couldn't pick me up other than sound.
[SPEAKER_01]: So I followed the tank sergeant into town with a luminous button on his belt.
[SPEAKER_01]: And I just had to stay so close to him.
[SPEAKER_01]: And we got into that town and I couldn't, I don't know how much whether I could have went, but I don't think very far because we were 110 miles on a tank of diesel is a long way.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: And you were pretty much out of ammunition, right?
[SPEAKER_01]: Pretty well out of ammunition and all that stuff.
[SPEAKER_01]: We couldn't have fought a very good battle with what we had left.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: But anyway, the German heard us come in and they started moving out.
[SPEAKER_00]: Mm-hmm.
[SPEAKER_00]: They didn't know you were out of ammunition.
[SPEAKER_00]: No, they didn't.
[SPEAKER_00]: They just knew you were there.
[SPEAKER_01]: And I wasn't going to tell them.
[SPEAKER_00]: You weren't going to tell them.
[SPEAKER_00]: So your job sort of switched.
[SPEAKER_00]: Your job was to support the infantry.
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, that was our main job all the way through, was to support the infantry.
[SPEAKER_00]: That's right.
[SPEAKER_00]: And in this strategy, they were taking care of you, too.
[SPEAKER_00]: They did.
[SPEAKER_01]: Yeah.
[SPEAKER_01]: Did a good job, too.
[SPEAKER_01]: The 104th said, bragged that they never lost a tank, and they didn't.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: And they were right there with us.
[SPEAKER_00]: And you're glad, because you're one of the tanks they didn't lose.
[SPEAKER_01]: I was one of the tanks.
[SPEAKER_00]: Talk about how I've always been fascinated to ask people, you know, as a 22, 23-year-old kid from Henderson, Texas, how did you feel having made the transition from being just a young Texas kid into warfare?
[SPEAKER_00]: I mean, you had to rely and trust on your training an awful lot, right?
[SPEAKER_00]: Were you scared?
[SPEAKER_01]: To start with, I was scared to death.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yes, sir.
[SPEAKER_01]: you automatically do what they train you to do regardless.
[SPEAKER_01]: Something has to kick in.
[SPEAKER_01]: So the training did.
[SPEAKER_01]: But I wasn't so fearful after I kind of got used to what was going on.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: Because I was busy taking care of ourselves, you know, in the battle and whatever.
[SPEAKER_01]: And listening to the orders that, of course, your captain always tried to take care of you anyway.
[SPEAKER_01]: But he was back observing what was going on.
[SPEAKER_01]: So when...
[SPEAKER_01]: you don't realize when you're in basic training, how much the safety of it kicks in until you're there.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: But it just automatically kicks in and you do the thing that you need to do to preserve yourself.
[SPEAKER_00]: You were in Europe for the better part, almost the entire part of the year of 1944, which is, you know, arguably the most significant year of the war as far as the European theater is concerned.
[SPEAKER_00]: You were during this, you were, you were,
[SPEAKER_00]: in this move through Germany when D-Day occurred in June of 1944.
[SPEAKER_00]: You were there.
[SPEAKER_00]: Were you all getting any news or anything like that, that there was an invasion in Normandy, that the decision had been made to make the final push and to defeat Hitler by making this final push?
[SPEAKER_00]: Were you all aware of sort of what was happening in the war rooms?
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, we knew when Hitler killed himself.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: And we were more or less brought up through
[SPEAKER_01]: Not by news, but by word of mouth from here to there and the little paper that they gave us.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: And so we kind of kept up on that all the way through.
[SPEAKER_01]: And we knew where the different units were because they were reported in the Stars and Tripes.
[SPEAKER_00]: Exactly.
[SPEAKER_01]: To let us know that we did have company over there.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: Yeah.
[SPEAKER_01]: And so that gave us assurance and helped us out a whole lot.
[SPEAKER_00]: Winter of 1944-45, that was in the Battle of the Bulge.
[SPEAKER_00]: And whenever I talk to anybody who served in the Battle of the Bulge, they talk about the weather.
[SPEAKER_00]: They talk about the cold.
[SPEAKER_00]: How do you describe it?
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, if he was at the North Pole, you would know it was terrific, I'll tell you that.
[SPEAKER_01]: We had our tanks hit in the snow.
[SPEAKER_00]: Is that right?
[SPEAKER_01]: Yeah.
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, I don't know other than to say that we just had six foot of snow, and you couldn't touch the tank with a bare hand.
[SPEAKER_01]: You had to stick to it.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: And I don't know how we made out, but we did.
[SPEAKER_01]: We lived through it.
[SPEAKER_01]: We didn't have any casualties there.
[SPEAKER_01]: We knocked out one German tank that had come through, lumbered through, and the first guy that was a tank sergeant
[SPEAKER_01]: called him porky he said oh we're not going to do this we're going to wait until he gets further down the line and we'll have more support right but when he come down there we put a white process on him and they come out like black wars go for nests so we didn't have anything any trouble with him just knocked the tank out it burned okay got three images i want to show you uh whitey birdwell
[SPEAKER_00]: This is your patch, which you have actually on the hat that you're wearing today, too.
[SPEAKER_00]: This is a close-up of it, of the 3rd Armored Division spearhead.
[SPEAKER_00]: That's the insignia.
[SPEAKER_00]: This is something that I came across that I found.
[SPEAKER_00]: It's a sketch, actually.
[SPEAKER_00]: And that is Major General Rose in the top of that tank.
[SPEAKER_00]: And he was actually, this is a depiction of the time that through a misunderstanding that he was actually killed at this time.
[SPEAKER_00]: And this was a depiction actually of the moments just prior to his murder.
[SPEAKER_00]: And you speak of Major General Rose.
[SPEAKER_00]: And that's sort of a look of what the kind of tank that you had
[SPEAKER_00]: And that you were driving.
[SPEAKER_00]: And you say not many generals rode in tanks, right?
[SPEAKER_01]: That's right.
[SPEAKER_01]: They didn't.
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, there wasn't many generals on the line.
[SPEAKER_00]: Exactly.
[SPEAKER_01]: Because they were back in the direction, in directing the Army and keeping up with casualties and all this stuff.
[SPEAKER_01]: And they gave, of course, they gave the orders, the marching orders and this kind of thing.
[SPEAKER_01]: They had a tremendous job to do to take care of everything other than just being on line.
[SPEAKER_00]: There's another sketch in the back end of a Sherman tank.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yeah.
[SPEAKER_00]: Of the type of tank that Whitey Birdwell piloted.
[SPEAKER_00]: And some of the terrain was quite interesting, I guess, right?
[SPEAKER_00]: Getting stuck in the mud.
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, we were...
[SPEAKER_01]: driving and we had had some anti-aircraft guns up on the hill and we wanted to dodge those so we got down low into going up by a valley and of course i got in the quicksand and i went down right so i had to stay there that night and suffer that anti-air attack fire for two or three hours and some of the infantry got hurt right we would jump down deep enough that the water was coming in our tanks
[SPEAKER_00]: Tell me the story that you were telling me before we started today, the story that you forgot to tell me the other day, that you were talking about.
[SPEAKER_01]: Oh, we were, after we carried our infantry up to the Earth River, where we met the Russians.
[SPEAKER_01]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: We went back to a little town called Sugar Town.
[SPEAKER_01]: It was Sukerstop, and that's what they called their villages, were Stots.
[SPEAKER_01]: And so we carried them up there, and we went back, of course, in the holding position, and we thought everything was over with and clear back there, but one morning,
[SPEAKER_01]: I think about three days after we carried our infantry up, the Germans come in on us.
[SPEAKER_01]: And I was in the tank at the time, but the captain's driver come running up and said, Germans is in town.
[SPEAKER_01]: So I said, well, go wake the guys up back on the door and holler help or something and just get them out here.
[SPEAKER_01]: And I said, I'll take my rifle and play infantry.
[SPEAKER_01]: The graveyard was right across the street.
[SPEAKER_01]: And so I said, you can drive my tank and I'll be out there.
[SPEAKER_01]: try to keep them off of you.
[SPEAKER_01]: So I got out there and fired one shot in my rifle.
[SPEAKER_01]: I was sitting out there at the graveyard and they're kicking up dirt around me.
[SPEAKER_01]: But anyway, it turned out real good.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yeah, because you're here talking to them.
[SPEAKER_01]: I'm here talking to them.
[SPEAKER_01]: They came by and I didn't know where the Germans were located.
[SPEAKER_01]: I knew that they were around that graveyard.
[SPEAKER_01]: So when they, of course, they didn't come through the graveyard with my tank and I didn't go across the fence.
[SPEAKER_01]: But anyway, they got down a ways, and they decided, well, we better come back.
[SPEAKER_01]: And so they come back firing the machine gun over me, and I got over the fence and followed the tank out.
[SPEAKER_01]: Everything turned out real good.
[SPEAKER_01]: It lasted about three or four hours, and we got them all cleaned out.
[SPEAKER_00]: When the war in Europe ended, you came back into holding patterns, came back to a rest camp.
[SPEAKER_00]: and sort of talk about what you did.
[SPEAKER_00]: A lot of the soldiers and the military people were told immediately, well, we're going to put you on boats and we're going to go over to Japan because we're going to fight a ground war there.
[SPEAKER_00]: But that was not part of your mission.
[SPEAKER_00]: Talk about what your mission was.
[SPEAKER_01]: Our mission was just to set up military government to clean the town, to pick up the
[SPEAKER_01]: arms and ammunition that were left over and kind of established a pattern of government for them.
[SPEAKER_01]: And so we came back from up there to an SS rest camp by, I don't know where it was really.
[SPEAKER_01]: But anyway, it was a nice log.
[SPEAKER_01]: encampment there, and we stayed there three days and nights and got everything ready.
[SPEAKER_01]: And we trolled back to Moorfield and by Frankfurt on the Rhine and stayed there several weeks till we got the town cleaned up.
[SPEAKER_01]: And then the military government took over and when they'd take over, we'd move out to another town
[SPEAKER_01]: cleaned it up and let the military come in.
[SPEAKER_01]: We wound up, the last place we were at was down in Swabish Hall down in southern Germany.
[SPEAKER_01]: And that's where we broke up and they put us on the cattle cars, carried us up to the North Sea and put us on the boat and brought us home after they made up a load.
[SPEAKER_00]: January 12, 1945, so you were overseas just over a year.
[SPEAKER_00]: And you said you went
[SPEAKER_00]: Probably in a year's time, you probably traveled about as far as anybody possibly could in one year's time.
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, I didn't go through, of course, I was lucky I didn't go through North Africa or I didn't come through Italy.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: But I went all the way through France, Belgium, and Germany.
[SPEAKER_00]: Exactly.
[SPEAKER_00]: And you came home.
[SPEAKER_00]: They tried to leave you, right?
[SPEAKER_00]: when you were coming home, they told you they were going to... Well, we got back into... You outsmarted them, yeah.
[SPEAKER_01]: We went down to Pittsburgh.
[SPEAKER_01]: We tried to see everything we could see while we was on that trip, but we didn't figure that we would ever have an opportunity to go back.
[SPEAKER_01]: So we went down to Pittsburgh, and...
[SPEAKER_01]: Got back into camp, but they'd already shipped out, so we just grabbed our bags and got on the train that was coming to Texas.
[SPEAKER_01]: It was the only time I could talk back to a colonel.
[SPEAKER_00]: But you ended up getting back before the rest of them, right?
[SPEAKER_01]: I sure did.
[SPEAKER_01]: Got my discharge before the rest of the Texas boys did.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yeah, they made room in the aisles for you to get home.
[SPEAKER_00]: You came home, you tried to get working.
[SPEAKER_00]: I looked this up because you made reference to it that you joined the 5220 Club.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yeah.
[SPEAKER_00]: I found out what that was, and it says, at the time, veterans were eligible to collect unemployment benefits for a period of one year.
[SPEAKER_00]: The amount paid was $20 a week for 52 weeks, hence the 5220 Club.
[SPEAKER_00]: At that time, $20 a week was a fairish amount of money, and that would roughly equate to about $400 a week in today's dollars.
[SPEAKER_00]: That would be about pay for that, but it was rough finding work.
[SPEAKER_00]: There wasn't any.
[SPEAKER_00]: Coming back, there wasn't any.
[SPEAKER_00]: Wasn't any work.
[SPEAKER_00]: So you were a 5220 guy.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: But eventually you did work and talk to sort of about what your career.
[SPEAKER_00]: I know you were in trucking, refinery business.
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, I started out driving a truck and that was a low paying job, but it was better than the farm hand.
[SPEAKER_01]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: And so I just went from there to construction work.
[SPEAKER_01]: And when they
[SPEAKER_01]: Time began to change and of course the refineries were trying to build themselves up into repair.
[SPEAKER_01]: Fort Beacon Davis had a job going into carbide and so I took off down to Texas City and went to work at Fort Beacon Davis.
[SPEAKER_01]: And I stayed down there for a number of years and worked construction work.
[SPEAKER_01]: And I worked there in Freeport.
[SPEAKER_01]: Galveston, Houston, then went to Chicago and worked there.
[SPEAKER_01]: And I worked Fort Arthur and wherever the work was.
[SPEAKER_00]: And whose house did you live in in Chicago?
[SPEAKER_00]: Paul Harvey's house.
[SPEAKER_00]: He actually owned the house that you leased, right?
[SPEAKER_00]: He owned the house that I leased.
[SPEAKER_00]: So he was your landlord, was Paul Harvey.
[SPEAKER_01]: He was in California at the time.
[SPEAKER_00]: And that's the rest of the story there.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yeah.
[SPEAKER_00]: He was in California at the time.
[SPEAKER_00]: That's right.
[SPEAKER_00]: You even talked about one time you actually lost a job indirectly because of Watergate.
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, I was in Phoenix working for Martin Construction.
[SPEAKER_01]: And the Martin... It was part of the Richard Nixon story.
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, one from California, I think it was a representative of some kind of senator, and he was mixed up in the Watergate, but he had previously bought in with the Martians of Phoenix.
[SPEAKER_01]: And so when this Watergate broke, or...
[SPEAKER_01]: We went out to job that morning.
[SPEAKER_01]: They said, clean up boys, we're through.
[SPEAKER_01]: We're going to be out of here in eight hours.
[SPEAKER_00]: That's a tough way to lose a job.
[SPEAKER_00]: We're just about out of time, Whitey, and I want to thank you.
[SPEAKER_00]: Your first wife, Edith, died of cancer, and you all had lost a child, but you had six children, and you married Patsy in 1965, and she had five children, and together 11.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yes.
[SPEAKER_00]: And thank you for being with us.
[SPEAKER_00]: We appreciate it.
[SPEAKER_01]: And thank you for your service.
[SPEAKER_01]: I lived in a wonderful world of women.
[SPEAKER_00]: Lucky you.
[SPEAKER_00]: Whitey Birdwell and his wife Patsy were married in 1965.
[SPEAKER_00]: And between them, 11 children, 18 grandkids, and 31 great-grandkids.
[SPEAKER_00]: And all can be justly proud of Whitey's service to our country.
[SPEAKER_00]: We salute him as we do all veterans.
[SPEAKER_00]: I'm Tom Turbeville.
[SPEAKER_00]: Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.